the Milky Way's family tree. So, our
galaxy, the Milky Way, has about 400
billion stars within it and spans a
diameter of about 100,000 light years
right from one side to the other. But
it's very thin, only a few thousand
light years wide with a central bulge in
the center. And you can see in this
stretched out image of the whole galaxy
that bulge and a lot of the dirty dust
lanes that span along the center. And we
are about halfway from the center to the
edge. So in a fairly unremarkable
midposition in the
galaxy. But the Milky Way is part of the
local group of galaxies which is
ourselves Milky Way and the Andromeda
galaxy, the triangulum galaxy, the big
big three. And that spans around 3
million light years in
total. So we have the two biggest
galaxies, the Milky Way and Andromeda.
Triangulum a little smaller, and then
about 30 dwarf galaxies as well. So,
let's just have a quick look at those.
The Andromeda galaxy is the largest. We
think it's about double the diameter of
the Milky Way at
220,000 light years. Lovely picture of
it there, slightly angled towards us.
So, we can see that spiral structure
within it with the central core and the
dirty dust lanes and then the bluer
outer regions where new hot young stars
have been born. and a total of about a
trillion stars. So again, about double
the number that we have, a little bit
more than
double. The smaller member, the third
largest is called the triangulum galaxy.
This is looks a lot fluffier when you
look at it, but you can see the spiral
arms. And it's about a tenth of the
number of stars that the Milky Way has,
so just 40 billion. Quite a lot
smaller. Now each of these galaxies has
their own little family of dwarf
galaxies. We can see that in some of the
images and we are no exception. We have
two particularly interesting ones. The
melanic clouds visible from the southern
hemisphere discovered and named after
Melan by the early
explorers.
And abbreviating them we can call them
the LMC and the SMC. And you can see the
statistics there and that lovely image
of them. So the LMC with 30 billion
stars is only a little bit smaller than
the triangulum galaxy in fact. So um
it's a little bit debatable as to
whether we should call the triangulum
galaxy a dwarf galaxy or not. We've seen
that problem before, haven't
we? So our
galaxy is very difficult to observe.
We're stuck inside it. It's like trying
to map a forest by standing in the
middle of the forest. You can't see very
well because of all the obscured lines
of sight, but we think that we have a
lovely spiral galaxy with a nucleus in
the center with the spiral arms
emanating from the end of a bar. So, a
barred spiral, something I will talk
about another time. But in the case of
the Milky Way, we may have two bars. a
short bar three and a half thousand
light years long and a longer bar 15,000
light years long. So it's quite
complicated in fact and as I said we
live just off a small spur the Orion
spur which is not really a proper spiral
arm all of its own. We have the
Sagittarius arm, the Norma arm, the
Scutum Centurus arm, the Perseus arm,
and the outer arm. And then the sun
there mapped just at the edge of this
little spur of stars called the Orion
spur. Douglas Adams described it as the
unfashionable end of the Orion spur.
So, orbiting around the outside of our
galaxy, we have about 150, maybe more of
these globular
clusters. Some people say that it might
be as many as 400. Certainly, the
Andromeda galaxy has about 400.
And these are tightly packed balls of
stars, maybe 10,000 up to half a million
or even a million stars all within a
very small radius around about a few
light years
only. So these have been used to
determine the shape of the galaxy and to
understand a little bit about star
formation. They're often very old with a
lot of old stars in there. You can see
the color. It's a fairly typical white
color. There aren't any of those
short-lived blue hot giant stars
present. They've all burnt out due to
the age of the galaxy. So, you've only
got the longer lived cooler stars
there. Now, one of the things that is an
active area of research at the moment is
the idea of stellar streams. And we have
discovered uh a dozen or so of these
streams of stars that seem to be
wrapping around and even passing through
the plane of our galaxy. And it's been
suggested, and we're fairly confident of
this, that these are the remains of
dwarf galaxies that have come too close
to the Milky Way. And the Milky Way's
gravity has stretched them out into
great long tidal
tails. And uh so we can see them
threading their way through the the
galaxy. One such is called the Virgo
radial merger. This is not a
fantastically good picture, but it's the
uh best there is of a series of shells
of stars found in the direction of the
Virgo constellation in the sky. And what
we think has caused this is the merger
of a dwarf galaxy that plunged through
at right
angles, came through the plane of the
Milky Way about 2.7 billion years ago.
One of the most famous though is an
active merger that started around 5 to
six billion years ago with an a major
collision about one or two billion years
in the past leading to a whole lot of
new star formation in the Milky Way due
to the gravitational disturbance that it
caused. But this is the Sagittarius
dwarf galaxy and the event is still
going on really. was still in the
process of merging with it and a stream
of stars has been identified with a
fairly large bulge still intact. So, it
looks like a very long, thin, stretched
out version of a dwarf galaxy looping
around the Milky Way. And in the center
of what looks like the bulge of this
dwarf galaxy lies a globular cluster.
Messier object number
54. Previously just thought to be an
ordinary globular cluster. But it might
well be that this is actually the core
of the Sagittarius dwarf
galaxy. And that is something which I uh
have a lot of time for. I believe that a
lot of these globular clusters are
actually the remnants of these merged
dwarfs. Going back a little bit further
in the history of the Milky Way though,
we have Gia and
Celadus. So around about 11
to 8 billion years ago, a large galaxy
merged with the Milky Way. This was
probably around 50 billion solar masses
of stars, gas, dust, and dark matter
included. And the the two names, Gaia
Enceladus, Enceladus refers to the
mythological giant who stories have it
is buried under Mount Etna and causes
earthquakes. So that's the Enceladus
part. And Gia, of course, is the
satellite named after the goddess of the
earth which is out beyond the earth
about a million miles away and has done
such fantastic work mapping a lot of the
stars in the galaxy. And it's from that
mapping that we've been able to figure
out that this merger must have happened
of these two fairly substantial
galaxies. 50 billion solar masses is is
pretty big. is getting on for the size
of uh some of the large dwarf galaxies
like the large melaninic cloud or even
the triangulum galaxy
perhaps. And one of the things that we
have noticed is that in the Milky Way
there are two different populations of
stars. Some of these orbit on long
elliptical orbits with eccentricities
approaching one. So 0.9 very very long
thin orbits and they also contain more
of the heavy elements than are
associated with the rest of the outer
halo stars in the Milky Way. And in fact
if you plot the Herzbrung Russell
diagram of the power output of the stars
versus their color which is a measure of
temperature. You actually see that we
have two distinct tracks which have been
colored in here in the sort of reddy
orange color for the original Milky Way
stars and a slightly different track
marked in blue there for the stars from
Gaia Enceladus. And you can see the
populations have both got suffered a a
turnoff where giant stars have started
to form and even zigzagged on a blue
loop and back to becoming asytoic giant
branch stars, AGB stars. That's the uh
follow the blue track at the upper
right. You see it goes sideways and then
up into the tip of the red giant branch
back down a blue loop and then curves
back almost vertically and off to form
these uh advanced versions of red
giants. And you can see exactly the same
trace for the uh darker bluey darker
brown colored trace for the Milky Way
there. And they both have the same shape
but slightly offset. And this is due to
the different metal contents. The
different levels of heavy elements make
a difference to the exact life cycle and
behavior and the temperature and the
rate at which stars burn according to
their mass. So we can distinguish
between them. And another way of doing
that is to look at their motion. And the
little yellow arrows are marking the
direction of movement of a lot of these
stars that we think come from Gaia and
Celadus. So you can see that they're
very distinct
population. The other thing that Gire
and Enceladus brought with it is its own
family of globular clusters adding at
least eight more to the collection that
surround the Milky Way. So it brought M2
56 75 and 79 with it. That's in the top
row there. And the bottom row is new
general catalog NGC 1851 2298 and
5286. And finally
2808. So eight of them, possibly more
that joined with it and are now
appearing to be globular clusters around
the Milky Way. But we think that they
originated from Gia Enceladus. And one
of them is particularly interesting and
that's the last one NGC 29 uh
2808. Now this is quite a big globular
cluster over a million stars. That's
rather bigger than
many. And interestingly, they don't all
seem to have exactly the same age. It
seems there are perhaps three
generations of stars suggesting that
they formed in three waves over a period
of about 200 million years from the
original birth date of the
cluster. And that's unusual. We don't
see that in very many of the smaller
globular clusters. Those all seem to
have the stars born at once. Perhaps we
just haven't looked closely enough.
Perhaps there's something going on. But
with this, we think that NGC 2808 is
actually the core of Gaia
Enceladus. And so again, that link
between things that were possibly
globular clusters and the dwarf
galaxies. And another case in point is
Omega Centuri. This is an even larger
globular cluster. It was always a bit of
an outlier. 10 million stars, 4 million
solar masses, the largest globular
known. Even has a a massive
uh black hole in the center, 40,000
solar masses of black hole.
And again, studies of the stars within
Omega Centuri show that they have seen
several bursts of star formation. And
again, we think this is probably the
core of a disrupted galaxy. And in fact,
all black hole uh all globular clusters
seem to share one thing with all
galaxies, which is that they all seem to
have a black hole in the center, a a
super massive black hole or an
intermediate mass black hole, much
larger than an ordinary black hole that
results from the collapse of a single
star. and that there is a 1,00 to1 ratio
between the mass of the galaxy or
globular cluster and the mass of the
black hole that it contains. This
produces a really quite good straight
line. And it seems very likely that this
is trying to tell us that they are
indeed related. Now, I've done another
video all about globular clusters where
I talk more about this, but we'll move
on.
Another cluster that was identified in
2007 by the two mass survey rather
difficult to observe because it was
obscured by a lot of intervening
material in our own galactic bulge.
That's why I say it's quite difficult to
study the Milky Way because all the
stars and dust get in the way. But
Tumass spotted this object FSR
1758 and GIA identified it to be a
globular
cluster. Since then we begining to think
that this might well be the nucleus of a
galaxy. The Scorpius dwarf galaxy name
has been given to it. Now this is a
little bit tentative. We haven't
necessarily identified it, but it's been
given the name the Seoia cluster. and
we'll see more about that in a moment.
Um, again, it it appears to have merged
and brought with it a number of other
globular clusters very much as Gia
Enceladus has
done. And then we have the Kraken
galaxy. I love some of these names.
Proposed in 2020. It's a hypothetical
galaxy that merged very, very early in
the history of the Milky Way. So the
Milky Way is about 13 billion years old
and it seems that the Kraken galaxy was
one of its first mergers around about 11
billion years ago and it brought with it
a total of 13 of those globular
clusters. So that's 9% of the surviving
globular clusters that we have around
the Milky
Way. And further evidence of the history
of mergers is shown by Gaia when it
looked at the distribution of stars
around the Milky Way and
revealed a
warp, a twisted nature of the spiral
arms going up on one side and down on
the other. And the the picture at the
top there is not an image, but it is a
reconstruction from data of all of the
mapped positions of stars and dust of
the Milky Way based on real GIA data. So
it's not an artist's impression so much
as a computer generated from the image.
And this warp also points back to this
history of mergers and collisions that
has built the Milky Way into the galaxy
it is
today. And one further thing that Gia
discovered was BH3, black hole number
three. There's a binary system of a
G-class yellow star that's just 3/4 the
mass of our sun, but has swollen up to
become a giant, five times the
radius. So at the end of its life, very
old indeed. And this is orbiting round,
taking 11.6 6 years to orbit around an
unseen companion that from the orbital
dynamics we can show is 32.7 solar
masses and we can't see it and therefore
it must be a black hole. This would be
interesting. It's one of the
largest of the stellar black holes that
we've found. So not associated with the
center of a um galaxy or a globular
cluster but it is associated with a
stream of stars the ED2 stream that is
moving around the galaxy in the wrong
direction. It's going retrograde the
opposite direction to most stars. And
again, this looks to have come from
another galactic merger about 8 billion
years ago. So if that is true and the uh
star orbiting the black hole shows an
age of older than this, then that star
and its companion BH3 have come in from
a dwarf galaxy and been delivered in to
become part of this stream in the Milky
Way. So, it just shows that there's a
lot of work going on in this area and
we're gradually piecing together the
story of how the Milky Way grew up. And
so, we have this little family tree here
of the Kraken galaxy, another group of
uh objects making up the Helmmy streams
that have come in and merged. That's
Seoia galaxy merger that I mentioned.
And then more recently, Gia and Celadus.
And nowadays we have the Sagittarius
dwarf galaxy merging in as well. And
I've just got a little animation here of
the possible simulation of the formation
of the Milky Way with all of this
material falling in and whirling round
under gravity. Very, very
chaotic. We'll run that one more time
just so you can see it. It's a little
bit quick.
So, thanks very much for listening. That
was a brief run through of the stellar
streams and the family tree that we
think has gone to make up the Milky Way
galaxy.